The Prototype

The concept was nothing new. Starting vegetables seeds indoors is a 24/7 continuous process that is very sensitive to environmental conditions. One range of ideal temperatures for germination during the day, another at night, for example. I wanted a product that would constantly monitor and control the system, and provide useful feedback about the conditions while I was away. Commercial solutions exist, but are typically designed for large farming operations making them bulky and expensive. Thus began the Greenbox project. 

Before starting this project, my lighting system was controlled by the common plug-in dial timer. This simple soluton conveniently had my lights turning on and off every 12 hours, while I carelessly attended my job during the day and slept at night, putting full trust in the timer to do its job. Which it did. However, at the time I was using the basic <a href="http://www.homedepot.com/p/Philips-120-Watt-Agro-Plant-Light-BR40-Flood-Light-Bulb-415307/202768441?MERCH=REC-_-PIPHorizontal1_rr-_-202766841-_-202768441-_-N">120W incandescent "grow" bulbs</a>, which really produced more heat than it did optical power. (In retrospect, the entire concept of a blue-filtered light bulb being better for growing than a regular incandescent bulb is totally bogus.) Hence, I probably lost about half of my seedlings to burn damage. Frustrating to say the least. 

At that point, I realized that I was not using the right lighting system, but I had already spent $50 on these light fixtures (I was using four lights for two standard seed trays). And upgrading to the fluorescent light fixture was going to be another $100 minimum. That was a non-starter for my budget at the time, so I was committed to using what was available. What was available was a Arduino Mega controller, a couple computer case fans, a temperature sensor, and a relay board capable of handling the house 120v. The Arduino would monitor the temperature sensor and when the ambient air temperature rose above a certain threshold, the controller would switch on the fans to cool things off. If the fans were not sufficient and the temperature continued to rise, the controller would temporarily switch off the light source as well until the temperature dropped below the threshold again. Thus preventing the loss of more seedlings to heat stroke!

All of these components went inside a plastic box I had lying around, and with a just a bit of simple programming had the first working prototype of The Greenbox. Of course, components laying in an enclosure is less than glamorous, plus the user received no useful information, even though there was plenty of useful data being collected. So for fun and functionality, I added a 20 x 4 LCD screen and 4 x4 keypad in order to provide a basic user interface. The software would record the temperature and humidity data for the preceeding 24 hours as well as the number of times the 

